First draft (#2)
vtex/react-hook-form-jsonschema: README.md

# react-hook-form-jsonschema

> Small project based on [react-hook-form](https://github.com/react-hook-form/react-hook-form) that exposes an API for easily creating customizable forms based on a [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/index.html) with built-in validation.

> 

Author: Like this?

```suggestion

react-hook-form-jsonschema is a React hooks library that manages all the stateful logic needed to make a form, based on a JSON Schema, functional. It returns a set of props that are meant to be called and their results destructured on the input field desired.

```

> 

Reviewer: Yes!

  - [Installation](#installation)
  - [Components API](#components-api)
    - [FormContext component](#formcontext-component)
  - [Hooks API](#hooks-api)
    - [useHidden(path)](#usehiddenpath)
    - [useInput(path)](#useinputpath)
    - [useObject(path, UISchema)](#useobjectpath-uischema)
    - [usePassword(path)](#usepasswordpath)
    - [useRadio(path)](#useradiopath)
    - [useSelect(path)](#useselectpath)
    - [useTextArea(path)](#usetextareapath)

## Simple Usage

Suppose you have a simple JSON Schema that stores a person's first name:

```js
const personSchema = {
  $id: 'https://example.com/person.schema.json',
  $schema: 'http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#',
  title: 'Person',
  type: 'object',
  properties: {
    firstName: {
      type: 'string',
      description: "The person's first name.",
    },
  },
}
```

And suppose you want to create a form field for the firstName field, simply use the useInput() hook for this and then render the form using react

```JSX
function FirstNameField(props) {
  const inputMethods = useInput('#/firstName');

  return (
    <FormContext schema={personSchema}>
      <label {...inputMethods.getLabelProps()}>

>         {inputMethods.name}

Author: I think it could be clear in the API description, but the `getLabelProps()` returns the props to connect the label to the input, it does not use any information in the schema to do that

      </label>
      <input {...inputMethods.getInputProps()} />
    </FormContext>
  )
}
```

## Installation

With npm:

```
npm install react-hook-form-jsonschema --save
```

Or with yarn:

```
yarn add react-hook-form-jsonschema
```

## Components API

### FormContext component

#### props:

##### Optional:

> - `mode`: String to indicate when to validate the input, default is `'onSubmit'`.

Author: I decided to keep the names that the react-hook-form lib already used, specially because I am simply forwarding this prop to the useForm hook defined in that library.

> - `mode`: String to indicate when to validate the input, default is `'onSubmit'`.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, but it seems a bit strange since this lib e about the form and not about validation (maybe about both, but even then seems weird), may validationMode would be more declarative

> - `mode`: String to indicate when to validate the input, default is `'onSubmit'`.

Author: You make a good point, I will change the name in the next release

>   - `'onblur'`: Validate when an input field is blurred

Author: ```suggestion
  - `'onBlur'`: Validate when an input field is blurred
```

- `getInputProps()`: use this with the spread operator inside an `<input>` tag and get the benefit of the validator, id field, name and an associated label with it

##### Example:

```JSX
function HiddenField(props) {
  const inputMethods = useHidden('#/some/child/you/want/hidden');

  return (
    <FormContext schema={personSchema}>
      <label {...inputMethods.getLabelProps()}>
        {inputMethods.name}
      </label>
      <input {...inputMethods.getInputProps()} />
    </FormContext>
  )
}
```

### useInput(path)

##### Description

Use this hook to build a generic input field in your form, with validation based on the type of input the JSON Schema requires.

##### Parameters:

- `path`: String which represents the path to the data field of the JSON Schema that this input will be built for.

##### Return:

Returns an object with the following fields, besides the common one's:

- `getLabelProps()`: use this with the spread operator inside a `<label>` tag and get the benefit of having all the important fields of the label filled in for you and the associated input (the `for` property) with it.

> - `getInputProps()`: use this with the spread operator inside an `<input>` tag and get the benefit of the validator, id field, name and an associated label with it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `getInputProps()`: use this with the spread operator inside an `<input>` tag and get the benefit of the validator, id field, name and an associated label with it.
```

##### Example:

```JSX
function InputField(props) {
  const inputMethods = useInput('#/some/child/you/want/as/input');

  return (
    <FormContext schema={personSchema}>
      <label {...inputMethods.getLabelProps()}>
        {inputMethods.name}
      </label>
      <input {...inputMethods.getInputProps()} />
    </FormContext>
  )
}
```

### useObject(path, UISchema)

##### Description

> This hook works a little different than the others. This hook will return an array of where each of it's elements corresponds to the return type of one of the others hook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This hook works a little differently than the others. This hook will return an array of which each of its elements corresponds to the return type of one of the other hooks.
```

  - `default`: input will have a default type based on what react-hook-form-jsonschema thinks is better.
  - `radio`: input will be of the radio type, just as returned by the `useRadio` hook
  - `select`: input will be of the select type, just as returned by the `useSelect` hook
  - `input`: input will be of the input type, just as returned by the `useInput` hook
  - `hidden`: input will be of the hidden type, just as returned by the `useHidden` hook
  - `password`: input will be of the password type, just as returned by the `usePassword` hook
  - `textArea`: input will be of the textarea type, just as returned by the `useTextArea` hook

##### Return:

Returns an array, with each element being the return of a different call to a hook for each child of the object that was passed in the path

##### Example:

```JSX
const personSchema = {
  title: 'Person',
  type: 'object',
  properties: {
    firstName: {
      type: 'string',
      description: "The person's first name.",
    },
    lastName: {
      type: 'string',
      description: "The person's last name.",
    },
    birthYear: {
      description: "The person's birth year.",
      type: 'integer',
      minimum: 1930,

>       maximum: 2010,

Author: Actually that is impossible, it is how it is defined in the JSON Schema [specification](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference/numeric.html#range)

>       maximum: 2010,

Reviewer 2: But this schema e passed to you before passsing to the JSON schema, if the name is better maybe it would be better to change it

>       maximum: 2010,

Author: I didn't understand, this is a JSON schema

##### Return:

Returns an object with the following fields, besides the common one's:

- `getLabelProps()`: use this with the spread operator inside a `<label>` tag and get the benefit of having all the important fields of the label filled in for you and the associated input (the `for` property) with it.
- `getInputProps()`: use this with the spread operator inside an `<input>` tag and get the benefit of the validator, id field, name and an associated label with it

##### Example:

```JSX
function PasswordField(props) {
  const inputMethods = usePassword('#/some/child/you/want/as/input');

  return (
    <FormContext schema={personSchema}>
      <label {...inputMethods.getLabelProps()}>
        {inputMethods.name}
      </label>
      <input {...inputMethods.getInputProps()} />
    </FormContext>
  )
}
```

### useRadio(path)

##### Description

Use this hook to build a radio field in your form.

##### Parameters:

- `path`: String which represents the path to the data field of the JSON Schema that this input will be built for.

##### Return:

Returns an object with the following fields, besides the common one's:

> - `getItems()`: use this to get all the values that are possible to be in the radio buttons

Author: Does this make it clearer?

```suggestion
- `getItems()`: use this to get which values should be listed inside the radio input fields. This function derives the items by the defined type and properties inside the JSON Schema and returns all the required items to comply with the definition.
```

          )
        })}
      </select>
      {inputMethods.getError() && <p>This is an error!</p>}
    </FormContext>
  )
}
```

### useTextArea(path)

##### Description

Use this hook to build a textarea field in the form.

##### Parameters:

- `path`: String which represents the path to the data field of the JSON Schema that this input will be built for.

##### Return:

Returns an object with the following fields, besides the common one's:

- `getLabelProps()`: use this with the spread operator inside a `<label>` tag and get the benefit of having all the important fields of the label filled in for you and the associated input (the `for` property) with it.
- `getTextAreaProps()`: use this with the spread operator inside an `<textarea>` tag and get the benefit of the validator, id field, name and an associated label with it

##### Example:

```JSX
function HiddenField(props) {
  const inputMethods = useTextArea('#/some/child/you/want/as/TextArea');

  return (
    <FormContext schema={personSchema}>
      <label {...inputMethods.getLabelProps()}>
        {inputMethods.name}
      </label>
      <textarea {...inputMethods.getTextAreaProps()} />
    </FormContext>
  )
}

> ```

Reviewer: It would be nice to have a "how to contribute"section, but you can do this later!

- `formContext`: If you want to access internal react-hook-form context use this
- `getError()`: Returns an `ErrorMessage`, which has the following format:
  - `{message: ErrorTypes, expected: ErrorMessageValues}`
  - **`ErrorTypes`**, is an enum, with the following values:
    - `required`: the field is required to be filled
    - `maxLength`: maximum lenght of string input was surpassed
    - `minLength`: minimum lenght of string input was not met
    - `maxValue`: maximum value of number input was surpassed
    - `minValue`: minimum value of number input was not met
    - `pattern`: the pattern or type defined in the schema was not met
    - `multipleOf`: the number is not a multiple of the number defined in the schema
    - `undefinedError`: the error type could not be defined
  - **`ErrorMessageValues`**, is the expected value to be met, it will be `true` for required, and the minimum value expected for `minValue` for example.
- `getObject()`: Returns the data field in the schema that this input refers to

**Please notice that in all of the examples bellow it is assumed that the components are already children of a FormContext component**

### useHidden(path)

> ##### Description

Reviewer 3: I don't think this level of heading is needed here. The description could simply follow the `###` title

Use this hook to build a hidden field in the form, the user will not be able to change it or see it, but it will be there when submitted.

> ##### Parameters:

Reviewer 3: And you also don't need to add colons for titles 🤓 Or you could use **Parameters:**

    </React.Fragment>
  )
}
```

### useInput(path)

##### Description

Use this hook to build a generic input field in your form, with validation based on the type of input the JSON Schema requires.

##### Parameters:

- `path`: String which represents the path to the data field of the JSON Schema that this input will be built for.

##### Return:

Returns an object with the following fields, besides the common one's:

- `getLabelProps()`: use this with the spread operator inside a `<label>` tag and get the benefit of having all the important fields of the label filled in for you and the associated input (the `for` property) with it.
- `getInputProps()`: use this with the spread operator inside an `<input>` tag and get the benefit of the validator, id field, name and an associated label with it.

##### Example:

```JSX
function InputField(props) {
  const inputMethods = useInput('#/some/child/you/want/as/input');

  return (
    <React.Fragment>
      <label {...inputMethods.getLabelProps()}>
        {inputMethods.name}
      </label>
      <input {...inputMethods.getInputProps()} />
    </React.Fragment>
  )
}
```

### useObject(path, UISchema)

##### Description

> This hook works a little differently than the others. This hook will return an array of which each of its elements corresponds to the return type of one of the other hooks.

Reviewer 3: To prevent repeating `this hook...`

```suggestion
This hook works a little differently than the others. `useObject` returns an array of which each of its elements corresponds to the return type of one of the other hooks.
```

##### Parameters:

- `path`: String which represents the path to the data field of the JSON Schema that this input will be built for.
- `UISchema` (Optional): This UISchema is a modified schema type, relative to the object passed in the `path` prop, the format of the UISchema is the following:

```js
const UISchema = {

>   /* This is the type that will be used to choose what type of input will be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  /*  This is the type that will be used to choose what type of input will be
```

Reviewer 3: Should also have a line break at the start of the comment

   *  used to build the specified field. Please note that the type of a node
   *  that is an object will be ignored, as there would make no sense to render
   *  an object without it's children inside a form.
   */
  type: UITypes,
  properties: {
    // Note that the definition is recursive
    child1NameHere: UISchema,
    child2NameHere: UISchema,
    // ...
    childXNameHere: UISchema,
  },
}
```

- The **`UITypes`** is an enum with the following values:
  - `default`: input will have a default type based on what react-hook-form-jsonschema thinks is better.
  - `radio`: input will be of the radio type, just as returned by the `useRadio` hook
  - `select`: input will be of the select type, just as returned by the `useSelect` hook
  - `input`: input will be of the input type, just as returned by the `useInput` hook
  - `hidden`: input will be of the hidden type, just as returned by the `useHidden` hook
  - `password`: input will be of the password type, just as returned by the `usePassword` hook
  - `textArea`: input will be of the textarea type, just as returned by the `useTextArea` hook

##### Return:

> Returns an array, with each element being the return of a different call to a hook for each child of the object that was passed in the path

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Returns an array, with each element being the return of a different call to a hook for each child of the object that was passed in the path.
```
